---
title: "Python Part 10: Classes"
date: 2016-06-28 10:00
modified: 2016-08-30
categories:
  - Python
tags:
  - Python Syntax
  - Python 2.x
published: true
excerpt: |
  A **class** is just a way of organizing and producing objects with similar attributes and methods.
series: "Intro to Python"	
---
{% include series.html %}

* TOC
{:toc}

Python is an object-oriented programming language, which means it manipulates programming constructs called **objects**. You can think of an object as a single data structure that contains data as well as functions; functions of objects are called **methods**. 

A **class** is just a way of organizing and producing objects with similar attributes and methods.

Classes can be very useful for storing complicated objects with their own methods and variables.

## Classes Are Like Modules

You can think about a module as a specialized dictionary that can store Python code so you can access it with the `.` operator. Python also has another construct that serves a similar purpose called a class. A class is a way to take a grouping of functions and data and place them inside a container so you can access them with the `.` (dot) operator.

If I were to create a class , I'd do something like this:

```python
class MyStuff(object):

    def __init__(self):
        self.tangerine = "And now a thousand years between"
    
    def apple(self):
        print "I AM CLASSY APPLES!"
```

That looks complicated compared to modules, and there is definitely a lot going on by comparison, but you should be able to make out how this is like a "mini-module" with `MyStuff` having an `apple()` function in it. What is probably confusing is the `__init__()` function and use of `self.tangerine` for setting the tangerine instance variable.

Here's why classes are used instead of modules: You can take this `MyStuff` class and use it to craft many of them, millions at a time if you want, and each one won't interfere with each other. When you import a module there is only one for the entire program unless you do some monster hacks.

Before you can understand this though, you need to know what an "object" is and how to work with `MyStuff` just like you do with the `mystuff.py `module.

## Objects are Like Import

If a class is like a "mini-module," then there has to be a similar concept to import but for classes. That concept is called "instantiate", which is just a fancy, obnoxious, overly smart way to say "create." When you instantiate a class what you get is called an object.

You instantiate (create) a class by calling the class like it's a function, like this:

```python
thing = MyStuff()
thing.apple()
print thing.tangerine
```

The first line is the "instantiate" operation, and it's a lot like calling a function. However, Python coordinates a sequence of events for you behind the scenes. I'll go through these steps using the above code for `MyStuff`:

1. Python looks for `MyStuff()` and sees that it is a class you've defined.
2. Python crafts an empty object with all the functions you've specified in the class using `def`.
3. Python then looks to see if you made a "magic" `__init__ `function, and if you have it calls that function to initialize your newly created empty object.
4. In the `MyStuff` function `__init__` I then get this extra variable `self`, which is that empty object Python made for me, and I can set variables on it just like you would with a module, dictionary, or other object.
5. In this case, I set `self.tangerine` to a song lyric and then I've initialized this object.
6. Now Python can take this newly minted object and assign it to the `thing` variable for me to work with.

That's the basics of how Python does this "mini-import" when you call a class like a function. Remember that this is not giving you the class, but instead is using the class as a blueprint for building a copy of that type of thing.

Keep in mind that I'm giving you a slightly inaccurate idea for how these work so that you can start to build up an understanding of classes based on what you know about modules. The truth is, classes and objects suddenly diverge from modules at this point. If I were being totally honest, I'd say something more like this:

* Classes are like blueprints or definitions for creating new mini-modules.
* Instantiation is how you make one of these mini-modules and import it at the same time. "Instantiate" just means to create an object from the class.
* The resulting created mini-module is called an object and you then assign it to a variable to work with it.

At this point objects behave differently from modules and this should only serve as a way for you to bridge over to understanding classes and objects.

## A First Class Example

```python
class Fruit(object):

    """A class that makes various tasty fruits."""
    def __init__(self, name, color, flavor, poisonous):
        self.name = name
        self.color = color
        self.flavor = flavor
        self.poisonous = poisonous
    
    def description(self):
        print "I'm a %s %s and I taste %s." % (self.color, self.name, self.flavor)
    
    def is_edible(self):
        if not self.poisonous:
            print "Yep! I'm edible."
        else:
            print "Don't eat me! I am super poisonous."

lemon = Fruit("lemon", "yellow", "sour", False)

lemon.description()
lemon.is_edible()
```

## Overview of OOP Terminology

here is small introduction of Object-Oriented Programming (OOP) to bring you at speed −

- **Class:**  A user-defined prototype for an object that defines a set of attributes that characterize any object of the class. The attributes are data members (class variables and instance variables) and methods, accessed via dot notation. 
- **Class variable:** A variable that is shared by all instances of a class. Class variables are defined within a class but outside any of the class's methods. Class variables are not used as frequently as instance variables are. 
- **Data member:** A class variable or instance variable that holds data associated with a class and its objects. 
- **Function overloading:** The assignment of more than one behavior to a particular function. The operation performed varies by the types of objects or arguments involved.
- **Instance variable:** A variable that is defined inside a method and belongs only to the current instance of a class. 
- **Inheritance:** The transfer of the characteristics of a class to other classes that are derived from it. 
- **Instance:**  An individual object of a certain class. An object obj that belongs to a class Circle, for example, is an instance of the class Circle.
- **Instantiation:** The creation of an instance of a class. 
- **Method :** A special kind of function that is defined in a class definition.
- **Object:** A unique instance of a data structure that's defined by its class. An object comprises both data members (class variables and instance variables) and methods. 
- **Operator overloading:** The assignment of more than one function to a particular operator.

## Class Basics

A basic class consists only of the `class` keyword, the name of the class, and the class from which the new class **inherits** in parentheses.

```python
class NewClass(object):
    # Class magic here
```

### Initialize the objects

`__init__()` is required for classes, and it's used to **initialize** the objects it creates. `__init__()` always takes at least one argument, `self`, that refers to the object being created. You can think of `__init__()` as the function that "boots up" each object the class creates.

```python
class Fruit(object):

    """A class that makes various tasty fruits."""
    def __init__(self, name, color, flavor, poisonous):
        self.name = name
        self.color = color
        self.flavor = flavor
        self.poisonous = poisonous
```

 `self` is the *first* parameter passed to `__init__()`. Python will use the first parameter that `__init__()` receives to refer to the object being created; this is why it's often called `self`, since this parameter gives the object being created its identity.

### Instantiating Your First Object

```python
# Class definition
class Animal(object):
    """Makes cute animals."""
    # For initializing our instance objects
    def __init__(self, name, age, is_hungry):
    # In order to assign a variable to the class (creating a member variable)
    # we use dot notation.
        self.name = name
        self.age = age
        self.is_hungry = is_hungry

# Note that self is only used in the __init__()
# function definition; we don't need to pass it
# to our instance objects.

zebra = Animal("Jeffrey", 2, True)
giraffe = Animal("Bruce", 1, False)
panda = Animal("Chad", 7, True)

print zebra.name, zebra.age, zebra.is_hungry
print giraffe.name, giraffe.age, giraffe.is_hungry
print panda.name, panda.age, panda.is_hungry
```

If you add additional arguments—for instance, a `name` and `age` for your animal—setting each of those equal to `self.name` and `self.age` in the body of `__init__()` will make it so that when you create an instance object of your `Animal` class, you need to give each instance a name and an age, and those will be associated with the particular instance you create.

### Class Scope

The **scope** of a variable is the context in which it's visible to the program.

When dealing with classes, you can have variables that are available everywhere (**global variables**), variables that are only available to members of a certain class (**member variables**), and variables that are only available to particular instances of a class (**instance variables**).

```python
class Animal(object):

    """Makes cute animals."""
    is_alive = True # Class Scope
    def __init__(self, name, age):
        self.name = name
        self.age = age

zebra = Animal("Jeffrey", 2)
giraffe = Animal("Bruce", 1)
panda = Animal("Chad", 7)

print zebra.name, zebra.age, zebra.is_alive
print giraffe.name, giraffe.age, giraffe.is_alive
print panda.name, panda.age, panda.is_alive
```

### A Methodical Approach

When a class has its own functions, those functions are called **methods**. You've already seen one such method: `__init__()`. But you can also define your own methods!

```python
class Animal(object):

    """Makes cute animals."""
    is_alive = True
    def __init__(self, name, age):
        self.name = name
        self.age = age
    # Add your method here!
    def description(self):
        print self.name
        print self.age
hippo = Animal('Anna', 'John')
hippo.description()
```

### Modifying member variables

```python
class Car(object):

    condition = "new"
    def __init__(self, model, color, mpg):
        self.model = model
        self.color = color
        self.mpg   = mpg
    def display_car(self):
        return 'This is a %s %s with %d MPG.' % (self.color, self.model, self.mpg)
    def drive_car(self):
        self.condition = 'used'

my_car = Car("DeLorean", "silver", 88)
print my_car.condition
my_car.drive_car()
print my_car.condition
```

## Inheritance

**Inheritance** is the process by which one class takes on the attributes and methods of another, and it's used to express an **is-a** relationship. 

> Most of the uses of inheritance can be simplified or replaced with composition, and multiple inheritance should be avoided at all costs.

```python
class Customer(object):

    """Produces objects that represent customers."""
    def __init__(self, customer_id):
        self.customer_id = customer_id
    
    def display_cart(self):
        print "I'm a string that stands in for the contents of your shopping cart!"

class ReturningCustomer(Customer):
    """For customers of the repeat variety."""
    def display_order_history(self):
        print "I'm a string that stands in for your order history!"

monty_python = ReturningCustomer("ID: 12345")
monty_python.display_cart()
monty_python.display_order_history()
```

### Inheritance Syntax

In Python, inheritance works like this:

```python
class DerivedClass(BaseClass):
    # code goes here
```

where `DerivedClass` is the new class you're making and `BaseClass` is the class from which that new class inherits.

### Override

Sometimes you'll want one class that inherits from another to not only take on the methods and attributes of its parent, but to **override** one or more of them.

```python
class Employee(object):
    def __init__(self, name):
        self.name = name
    def greet(self, other):
        print "Hello, %s" % other.name

class CEO(Employee):
    def greet(self, other): # override
        print "Get back to work, %s!" % other.name

ceo = CEO("Emily")
emp = Employee("Steve")
emp.greet(ceo)
# Hello, Emily
ceo.greet(emp)
# Get back to work, Steve!
```

### Super

You can directly access the attributes or methods of a superclass with Python's built-in `super` call.

The syntax looks like this:

```python
class Derived(Base):
   def m(self, arg):
       return super(Derived, self).m(arg)
```

Where `m()` is a method from the base class.

```python
class Employee(object):

    """Models real-life employees!"""
    def __init__(self, employee_name):
        self.employee_name = employee_name
    
    def calculate_wage(self, hours):
        self.hours = hours
        return hours * 20.00

class PartTimeEmployee(Employee):
    def calculate_wage(sefl, hours):
        self.hours = hours
        return  hours*12.00
    def full_time_wage(self, hours):
        return super(PartTimeEmployee, self).calculate_wage(hours) # super
milton = PartTimeEmployee('Nobody')
print milton.full_time_wage(10)
```

### Using `super()` with `__init__`

The most common use of `super()` is actually in `__init__` functions in base classes.  This is usually the only place where you need to do some things in a child, then complete the initialization in the parent.  Here's a quick example of doing that in the Child:

```python
class Child(Parent):

    def __init__(self, stuff):
        self.stuff = stuff
        super(Child, self).__init__()
```

This is pretty much the same as the `Child.altered` example above, except I'm setting some variables in the `__init__` before having the Parent initialize with its `Parent.__init__`.

## Composition

Inheritance is useful, but another way to do the exact same thing is just to use other **classes and modules**, rather than rely on implicit inheritance. If you look at the three ways to exploit inheritance, two of the three involve writing new code to replace or alter functionality. This can easily be replicated by just calling functions in a module. Here's an example of doing this:

```python
class Other(object):

    def override(self):
        print "OTHER override()"
    
    def implicit(self):
        print "OTHER implicit()"
    
    def altered(self):
        print "OTHER altered()"

class Child(object):

    def __init__(self):
        self.other = Other()
    
    def implicit(self):
        self.other.implicit()
    
    def override(self):
        print "CHILD override()"
    
    def altered(self):
        print "CHILD, BEFORE OTHER altered()"
        self.other.altered()
        print "CHILD, AFTER OTHER altered()"

son = Child()

son.implicit()
son.override()
son.altered()
```

In this code I'm not using the name `Parent`, since there is not a parent-child `is-a` relationship. This is a `has-a` relationship, where `Child` `has-a` `Other` that it uses to get its work done. When I run this I get the following output:

```
$ python ex44e.py
OTHER implicit()
CHILD override()
CHILD, BEFORE OTHER altered()
OTHER altered()
CHILD, AFTER OTHER altered()
```

You can see that most of the code in `Child` and `Other` is the same to accomplish the same thing. The only difference is that I had to define a `Child.implicit` function to do that one action. I could then ask myself if I need this `Other` to be a class, and could I just make it into a module named `other.py`?

## When to Use Inheritance or Composition

The question of "inheritance versus composition" comes down to an attempt to solve the problem of reusable code.  You don't want to have duplicated code all over your software, since that's not clean and efficient.  Inheritance solves this problem by creating a mechanism for you to have implied features in base classes.  Composition solves this by giving you modules and the ability to call functions in other classes.

If both solutions solve the problem of reuse, then which one is appropriate in which situations?  The answer is incredibly subjective, but I'll give you my three guidelines for when to do which:

1. Avoid multiple inheritance at all costs, as it's too complex to be reliable.  If you're stuck with it, then be prepared to know the class hierarchy and spend time finding where everything is coming from.
2. Use composition to package code into modules that are used in many different unrelated places and situations.
3. Use inheritance only when there are clearly related reusable pieces of code that fit under a single common concept or if you have to because of something you're using.

Do not be a slave to these rules.  The thing to remember about object-oriented programming is that it is entirely a social convention programmers have created to package and share code.  Because it's a social convention, but one that's codified in Python, you may be forced to avoid these rules because of the people you work with.  In that case, find out how they use things and then just adapt to the situation.

## More Info

[Python Object Oriented](http://www.tutorialspoint.com/python/python_classes_objects.htm)

[面向对象编程](http://www.liaoxuefeng.com/wiki/001374738125095c955c1e6d8bb493182103fac9270762a000/0013868200385680e8cf932dba9433ea367de9aba2b4784000)

[Exercise 44: Inheritance Versus Composition](https://learnpythonthehardway.org/book/ex44.html)

{% include series.html %}
